research.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: /research/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/falklands-rally-1982.jpg" caption="Argentine citizens rally in April 1982 at May Square in Buenos Aires, demonstrating support for their government's recent invasion of the British-held Falkland Islands. (Panta Astiazaran, AFP, Getty Images)" width=400 align="right" %}

My research has to date focused on two broad sets of question. The first and most active part of my research agenda focuses on the effect of external threat, especially to the territorial integrity of the state, on the political attitudes of citizens. Here, I have a keen interest in what happens to citizen attitudes toward the government and what type of authority the government should have. The second part of my research agenda is rooted in the peace science approach to the study of international conflict. Here, my research has explored either the conditions of militarized interstate dispute (MID) onset and escalation or how we should understand code these events. In addition, I have also published various items on political topics of interest to me in light of current events. I offer [a three-page research statement](/docs/svm-research-statement.pdf) that summarizes and contextualizes my different research agendas. [My CV](http://svmiller.com/cv/) contains some more information about works in progress and where some of these works in progress are in the peer review process. [A statement of societal interaction](/docs/svm-societal-interaction.pdf) elaborates how my research has had an impact on society in the form of various media appearances and discussions with journalists about my research.

<!-- I also provide titles for some working papers and works in progress below. I provide full links for these papers when I believe they are ready for peer review. Feel free to contact me if you are interested in some of these projects. [My CV](http://svmiller.com/cv/) contains more information about where some of these projects are in the peer review process.

I also offer [a three-page research statement](/docs/svm-research-statement.pdf) that summarizes and contextualizes my different research agendas. -->
 
<hr style="clear:both;visibility: hidden;" />  

## Original Data

[*Gibler-Miller-Little (GML) MID Data*](/gml-mid-data/) ![Version 2.2.1](https://img.shields.io/badge/release-v2.2.1-blue.svg) <br /> This page contains links to download non-directed/directed dyad-year militarized interstate dispute (MID) data derived from my co-authored project published in [*International Studies Quarterly*](https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/60/4/719/2918882/An-Analysis-of-the-Militarized-Interstate-Dispute?redirectedFrom=fulltext).

## Publications

Gibler, Douglas M., Steven V. Miller, and Erin K. Little. Forthcoming. "[The Importance of Correct Measurement](https://doi.org/10.1093/isq/sqaa011)." *International Studies Quarterly*.

Miller, Steven V. Forthcoming. "[Economic Anxiety or Ethnocentrism? An Evaluation of Attitudes Toward Immigration in the U.S. From 1992 to 2017](/research/economic-anxiety-ethnocentrism-immigration-1992-2017/)." *Social Science Journal.*

Miller, Steven V. and Nicholas T. Davis. Forthcoming. "[The Effect of White Social Prejudice on Support for American Democracy](/research/white-social-prejudice-support-american-democracy/)." *Journal of Race, Ethnicity, and Politics.*


Miller, Steven V. 2019. "[What Americans Think About Gun Control: Evidence from the General Social Survey, 1972-2016](/research/what-americans-really-think-about-gun-control/)". *Social Science Quarterly* 100(1): 272-288.

Miller, Steven V. 2018. "[External Territorial Threats and Tolerance of Corruption: A Private/Government Distinction](/research/external-territorial-threats-and-tolerance-of-corruption-a-privategovernment-distinction/)". *Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy* 24(1): `doi:` [10.1515/peps-2017-0043](https://doi.org/10.1515/peps-2017-0043)

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[The Effect of Terrorism on Judicial Confidence](http://svmiller.com/research/effect-terrorism-judicial-confidence/)." *Political Research Quarterly* 70(4): 790--802.

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[Individual-Level Expectations of Executive Authority under Territorial Threat](/research/individual-level-expectations-of-executive-authority-under-territorial-threat/)." *Conflict Management and Peace Science* 34(5): 526-545.

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[Economic Threats or Societal Turmoil? Understanding Preferences for Authoritarian Political Systems](/research/economic-threats-or-societal-turmoil-understanding-preferences-for-authoritarian-political-systems/)." *Political Behavior* 39(2): 457-478.

Gibler, Douglas M., Steven V. Miller, and Erin K. Little. 2016. "[An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001](http://dmgibler.people.ua.edu/mid-replication.html)." *International Studies Quarterly* 60(4): 719-730.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2014. "[External Territorial Threat, State Capacity, and Civil War](http://dmgibler.people.ua.edu/state-capacity.html)." *Journal of Peace Research* 51(5): 634-646.

Miller, Steven V. 2013. "[Territorial Disputes and the Politics of Individual Well-Being](/research/territorial-disputes-and-the-politics-of-individual-well-being/)." *Journal of Peace Research* 50(6): 677-690.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2013. "[Quick Victories? Territory, Democracies and Their Disputes](http://jcr.sagepub.com/content/57/2/258.full)." *Journal of Conflict Resolution* 57(2): 258-284.

Gibler, Douglas M., Marc L. Hutchison and Steven V. Miller. 2012. "[Individual Identity Attachments and International Conflict: The Importance of Territorial Threat](http://cps.sagepub.com/content/45/12/1655.full)." *Comparative Political Studies* 45(12): 1655-1683.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2012. "[Comparing the Foreign Aid Policies of Presidents Bush and Obama](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-6237.2012.00909.x/full)." *Social Science Quarterly* 93(5): 1202-1217.

Miller, Steven V. and Douglas M. Gibler. 2011. "[Democracies, Territory and Negotiated Compromises](http://cmp.sagepub.com/content/28/3/261)." *Conflict Management and Peace Science* 28(3): 261-279.

## Book Chapters

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. Forthcoming. "The Territorial Peace." *What Do We Know About War?* (3rd ed.). Routledge.

Miller, Steven V., Jaroslav Tir, and John A. Vasquez. 2020. "[Geography, Territory, and Conflict](https://oxfordre.com/internationalstudies/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-320)." *Oxford Research Encyclopedia of International Studies.* `doi:` [10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.320](https://oxfordre.com/internationalstudies/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-320)

## Book Reviews

Miller, Steven V. 2020. "[Power without Victory: Woodrow Wilson and the American Internationalist Experiment](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07343469.2020.1761051)" *Congress & the Presidency*.

- Review of Throntveit, Trygve. 2017. *Power without Victory: Woodrow Wilson and the American Internationalist Experiment*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Miller, Steven V. 2019. "[National Identity and Territory in a World of Changing Scale](https://academic.oup.com/isr/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/isr/viy051/5026359?redirectedFrom=fulltext)" *International Studies Review* 20(4): 728--730

- Review of Herb, Guntram M. and David H. Kaplan. 2017. *Scaling Identities: Nationalism and Territoriality*. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

## Reports

Miller, Steven V. 2020. "[School Choice Advocacy Report Plays Regression Modeling Games to Make Its Case Against Public Schools](https://nepc.info/newsletter/2019/12/school-satisfaction)." National Education Policy Center.

<!-- ## Select Working Papers and Works in Progress

"Understanding Carrots and Sticks in U.S. Aid Allocation: The Case of the Middle East"

"U.S. Presidents, Human Rights, and Economic Aid from Truman to Obama: A Mixed Effects Approach"

"Convergence or Divergence? The Unique Effect of Territorial Threats on Attitudes toward Authoritarian Leaders" -->

Commit message:

this will do for now. I can/should tidy this up.

research.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Research
permalink: /research/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/falklands-rally-1982.jpg" caption="Argentine citizens rally in April 1982 at May Square in Buenos Aires, demonstrating support for their government's recent invasion of the British-held Falkland Islands. (Panta Astiazaran, AFP, Getty Images)" width=400 align="right" %}

My research has to date focused on two broad sets of question. The first and most active part of my research agenda focuses on the effect of external threat, especially to the territorial integrity of the state, on the political attitudes of citizens. Here, I have a keen interest in what happens to citizen attitudes toward the government and what type of authority the government should have. The second part of my research agenda is rooted in the peace science approach to the study of international conflict. Here, my research has explored either the conditions of militarized interstate dispute (MID) onset and escalation or how we should understand code these events. In addition, I have also published various items on political topics of interest to me in light of current events. I offer [a three-page research statement](/docs/svm-research-statement.pdf) that summarizes and contextualizes my different research agendas. [My CV](http://svmiller.com/cv/) contains some more information about works in progress and where some of these works in progress are in the peer review process. [A statement of societal interaction](/docs/svm-societal-interaction.pdf) elaborates how my research has had an impact on society in the form of various media appearances and discussions with journalists about my research.

<!-- I also provide titles for some working papers and works in progress below. I provide full links for these papers when I believe they are ready for peer review. Feel free to contact me if you are interested in some of these projects. [My CV](http://svmiller.com/cv/) contains more information about where some of these projects are in the peer review process.

I also offer [a three-page research statement](/docs/svm-research-statement.pdf) that summarizes and contextualizes my different research agendas. -->
 
<hr style="clear:both;visibility: hidden;" />  

## Data Sets Created/Maintained

[*Gibler-Miller-Little (GML) MID Data*](/gml-mid-data/) ![Version 2.2.1](https://img.shields.io/badge/release-v2.2.1-blue.svg) <br /> This page contains links to download non-directed/directed dyad-year militarized interstate dispute (MID) data derived from my co-authored project published in [*International Studies Quarterly*](https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/60/4/719/2918882/An-Analysis-of-the-Militarized-Interstate-Dispute?redirectedFrom=fulltext).

[*Territorial Change*](https://correlatesofwar.org/data-sets/territorial-change) ![Version 6](https://img.shields.io/badge/release-v6-blue.svg) <br /> This data set records all peaceful and violent changes of territory from 1816-2018.

## Software Created

[`dragracer`](https://github.com/svmiller/dragracer) [![](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/dragracer?color=green)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=dragracer) [![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/dragracer?color=green)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=dragracer): R package for learning R functions around data from RuPaul's Drag Race  
[`stevedata`](https://github.com/svmiller/stevedata): R package for miscellaneous data sets I've use for in-class instruction  
[`stevemisc`](https://github.com/svmiller/stevemisc): R package of various helper functions (esp. for mixed models and BTSCS models)  
[`stevetemplates`](https://github.com/svmiller/stevetemplates) [![](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/stevetemplates?color=green)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=stevetemplates) [![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/stevetemplates?color=green)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=stevetemplates): R package for [my suite of R Markdown templates](https://github.com/svmiller/svm-r-markdown-templates) 

## Publications

Gibler, Douglas M., Steven V. Miller, and Erin K. Little. Forthcoming. "[The Importance of Correct Measurement](https://doi.org/10.1093/isq/sqaa011)." *International Studies Quarterly*.

Miller, Steven V. Forthcoming. "[Economic Anxiety or Ethnocentrism? An Evaluation of Attitudes Toward Immigration in the U.S. From 1992 to 2017](/research/economic-anxiety-ethnocentrism-immigration-1992-2017/)." *Social Science Journal.*

Miller, Steven V. and Nicholas T. Davis. Forthcoming. "[The Effect of White Social Prejudice on Support for American Democracy](/research/white-social-prejudice-support-american-democracy/)." *Journal of Race, Ethnicity, and Politics.*


Miller, Steven V. 2019. "[What Americans Think About Gun Control: Evidence from the General Social Survey, 1972-2016](/research/what-americans-really-think-about-gun-control/)". *Social Science Quarterly* 100(1): 272-288.

Miller, Steven V. 2018. "[External Territorial Threats and Tolerance of Corruption: A Private/Government Distinction](/research/external-territorial-threats-and-tolerance-of-corruption-a-privategovernment-distinction/)". *Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy* 24(1): `doi:` [10.1515/peps-2017-0043](https://doi.org/10.1515/peps-2017-0043)

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[The Effect of Terrorism on Judicial Confidence](http://svmiller.com/research/effect-terrorism-judicial-confidence/)." *Political Research Quarterly* 70(4): 790--802.

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[Individual-Level Expectations of Executive Authority under Territorial Threat](/research/individual-level-expectations-of-executive-authority-under-territorial-threat/)." *Conflict Management and Peace Science* 34(5): 526-545.

Miller, Steven V. 2017. "[Economic Threats or Societal Turmoil? Understanding Preferences for Authoritarian Political Systems](/research/economic-threats-or-societal-turmoil-understanding-preferences-for-authoritarian-political-systems/)." *Political Behavior* 39(2): 457-478.

Gibler, Douglas M., Steven V. Miller, and Erin K. Little. 2016. "[An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001](http://dmgibler.people.ua.edu/mid-replication.html)." *International Studies Quarterly* 60(4): 719-730.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2014. "[External Territorial Threat, State Capacity, and Civil War](http://dmgibler.people.ua.edu/state-capacity.html)." *Journal of Peace Research* 51(5): 634-646.

Miller, Steven V. 2013. "[Territorial Disputes and the Politics of Individual Well-Being](/research/territorial-disputes-and-the-politics-of-individual-well-being/)." *Journal of Peace Research* 50(6): 677-690.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2013. "[Quick Victories? Territory, Democracies and Their Disputes](http://jcr.sagepub.com/content/57/2/258.full)." *Journal of Conflict Resolution* 57(2): 258-284.

Gibler, Douglas M., Marc L. Hutchison and Steven V. Miller. 2012. "[Individual Identity Attachments and International Conflict: The Importance of Territorial Threat](http://cps.sagepub.com/content/45/12/1655.full)." *Comparative Political Studies* 45(12): 1655-1683.

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. 2012. "[Comparing the Foreign Aid Policies of Presidents Bush and Obama](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-6237.2012.00909.x/full)." *Social Science Quarterly* 93(5): 1202-1217.

Miller, Steven V. and Douglas M. Gibler. 2011. "[Democracies, Territory and Negotiated Compromises](http://cmp.sagepub.com/content/28/3/261)." *Conflict Management and Peace Science* 28(3): 261-279.

## Book Chapters

Gibler, Douglas M. and Steven V. Miller. Forthcoming. "The Territorial Peace." *What Do We Know About War?* (3rd ed.). Routledge.

Miller, Steven V., Jaroslav Tir, and John A. Vasquez. 2020. "[Geography, Territory, and Conflict](https://oxfordre.com/internationalstudies/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-320)." *Oxford Research Encyclopedia of International Studies.* `doi:` [10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.320](https://oxfordre.com/internationalstudies/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-320)

## Book Reviews

Miller, Steven V. 2020. "[Power without Victory: Woodrow Wilson and the American Internationalist Experiment](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07343469.2020.1761051)" *Congress & the Presidency*.

- Review of Throntveit, Trygve. 2017. *Power without Victory: Woodrow Wilson and the American Internationalist Experiment*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Miller, Steven V. 2019. "[National Identity and Territory in a World of Changing Scale](https://academic.oup.com/isr/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/isr/viy051/5026359?redirectedFrom=fulltext)" *International Studies Review* 20(4): 728--730

- Review of Herb, Guntram M. and David H. Kaplan. 2017. *Scaling Identities: Nationalism and Territoriality*. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

## Reports

Miller, Steven V. 2020. "[School Choice Advocacy Report Plays Regression Modeling Games to Make Its Case Against Public Schools](https://nepc.info/newsletter/2019/12/school-satisfaction)." National Education Policy Center.

<!-- ## Select Working Papers and Works in Progress

"Understanding Carrots and Sticks in U.S. Aid Allocation: The Case of the Middle East"

"U.S. Presidents, Human Rights, and Economic Aid from Truman to Obama: A Mixed Effects Approach"

"Convergence or Divergence? The Unique Effect of Territorial Threats on Attitudes toward Authoritarian Leaders" -->
