teaching/posc-3610.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "POSC 3610 – International Politics in Crisis"
permalink: /teaching/posc-3610-international-politics-in-crisis/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/1965-dacca-women-target-practice.jpg" caption="Women, some of whom are quite young in this photo, take target practice in Dacca (East Pakistan, now Bangladesh) during the 1964-65 Indo-Pakistani War." width=850 align="center" %}

The onset, expansion and consequences of inter-state conflict lie at the heart of international relations scholarship.  This class will explore these topics, highlighting what we know and what we do not know. We will start by clarifying our concepts and what we mean when we use terms like "dispute" and "war." The rest proceeds as an overview of the literature in the spirit of the Correlates of War project. We will discuss the ubiquitous and problematic issue of "power" in international relations. We will reiterate that most conflicts are between land-contiguous neighbors and concern territorial issues between them. Thereafter, we will discuss numerous other correlates of war and peace, like alliances, joint democracy, and rivalry. We will also talk about conflict processes like deterrence, compellence, dispute escalation and the dynamics of war. Students that complete this class should have a broad overview of prominent quantitative scholarship on the cause of disputes and war in the international system, situating them in scholarship in the "peace science" field.


## Course Materials

1. [Syllabus](https://www.dropbox.com/s/issmjjkzl8cjtt5/posc3610-fall2017-syllabus.pdf?dl=0)
2. [Set Up Google Scholar to Find Class Readings on Your Syllabus](http://svmiller.com/blog/2017/07/set-up-google-scholar-to-find-class-readings/)
3. [Dos and Dont's of Writing for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
4. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
5. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
6. [Article Summary Rubric](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9j66ns1g2briyv9/posc3610-article-summary-rubric.pdf?dl=0)
7. [Fun with Attendance and Grades (i.e. Students Should Attend Class)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/fun-with-attendance-grades/)
8. [The Educational Power of Discomfort](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/educational-power-discomfort/)
9. [Everybody Writes: A Web Content Approach for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/everybody-writes-academic/)
10. [Put Your Laptops Away, Kids (Vol. 2)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/put-your-laptops-away-2/)
11. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
12. [Ward and Gleditsch (1998)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2zs0m2upcvuq3vf/svm-notes-wardgleditsch1998dp.pdf?dl=0) [article summary example]
13. [Welcome](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bzgymb6f8qryykw/posc3610-lecture-welcome.pdf?dl=0)
14. [The Scientific Study of War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/12miyyhlsmgxyuw/posc3610-lecture-scientific-study-war.pdf?dl=0)
15. [Defining Conflicts and Disputes](https://www.dropbox.com/s/vkhb32fk40aa559/posc3610-lecture-defining-conflict-disputes.pdf?dl=0)
16. [States, War, and Conflict Patterns](https://www.dropbox.com/s/6qfz38myn4zprva/posc3610-lecture-states-war-mid-patterns.pdf?dl=0)
17. [Thinking Rationally and Strategically](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ye1pqtk2ux12guh/posc3610-lecture-rationality-1.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Identifying Opportunity for Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/3zaax7g1z9le5la/posc3610-lecture-opportunity-conflict.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Territorial Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/x7ge8udoabr5gcw/posc3610-lecture-territorial-conflict.pdf?dl=0)

<!-- 
3. [Dos and Dont's of Writing for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
4. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
5. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
6. [Article Summary Rubric](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9j66ns1g2briyv9/posc3610-article-summary-rubric.pdf?dl=0)
7. [Fun with Attendance and Grades (i.e. Students Should Attend Class)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/fun-with-attendance-grades/)
8. [The Educational Power of Discomfort](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/educational-power-discomfort/)
9. [Everybody Writes: A Web Content Approach for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/everybody-writes-academic/)
10. [Put Your Laptops Away, Kids (Vol. 2)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/put-your-laptops-away-2/)
11. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
12. [Ward and Gleditsch (1998)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2zs0m2upcvuq3vf/svm-notes-wardgleditsch1998dp.pdf?dl=0) [article summary example]
13. [Kugler and Lemke (2000)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/n4vsq4cq57f3nc2/kuglerlemke2000ptrp.pdf?dl=0) [reading for Week 3]
14. [Introduction/Welcome](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zceionkujy9yoea/posc3610-lecture-syllabus-day.pdf?dl=0)
15. [Defining Conflicts and Disputes](https://www.dropbox.com/s/vkhb32fk40aa559/posc3610-lecture-defining-conflict-disputes.pdf?dl=0)
16. [Inter-State, Intra-State, and Extra-State Wars: A Comprehensive Look at Their Distribution over Time, 1816 - 1997](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s6mhw9cqai0uf1c/posc3610-lecture-sarkeesetal2003isis.pdf?dl=0)
17. [The Origins of War in Neorealist Theory](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhxaif1mvmjyyrv/posc3610-lecture-waltz1988ownt.pdf?dl=0)
18. [The Power Transition Research Program: Assessing Theoretical and Empirical Advances](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/s/wxyxg0giakuwowv/posc3610-lecture-kuglerlemke2000ptrp.html?dl=0)
19. [Alliance Formation and the Balance of Power](https://www.dropbox.com/s/dol1kqh1fnqqm67/posc3610-lecture-walt1985afb.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Alliance Formation and War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/98obh1edmyluihm/posc3610-lecture-smith1995afw.pdf?dl=0)
21. [Arms Races and War: A Debate](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zstnd0dgx0mcxd2/posc3610-lecture-arms-races-debate.pdf?dl=0)
22. [Arms Races and Dispute Escalation: Resolving the Debate](https://www.dropbox.com/s/topalyz7m1oc29n/posc3610-lecture-sample1997arde.pdf?dl=0)
23. [Midterm 1 Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s1brij7soplzyqo/posc3610-midterm1-review.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Normative and Structural Causes of Democratic Peace, 1946-1986](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0dq30vqvqswa098/posc3610-lecture-maozrussett1993nsc.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Assessing the Dyadic Nature of the Democratic Peace, 1918-88](https://www.dropbox.com/s/b3xye1ebhtfoiiw/posc3610-lecture-rousseauetal1996adn.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Democracy and the Peaceful Settlement of International Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1k8b5za8a8j83rv/posc3610-lecture-dixon1994dps.pdf?dl=0)
27. [Democracy, War Initiation, and Victory](https://www.dropbox.com/s/quoy3ft74ihobvb/posc3610-lecture-reiterstam1998dwiv.pdf?dl=0)
28. [Why Do Neighbors Fight? Proximity, Interaction or Territoriality](https://www.dropbox.com/s/tb88tc4yuz8d1i4/posc3610-lecture-vasquez1995wdn.pdf?dl=0)
29. [A Unified Explanation of Territorial Conflict: Testing the Impact of Sampling Bias, 1919-1992](https://www.dropbox.com/s/gk4znc7jvg8tjfd/posc3610-lecture-senesevasquez2003uetc.pdf?dl=0)
30. [Understanding Arms Race Onset: Rivalry, Threat, and Territorial Competition](https://www.dropbox.com/s/e8nx75q4bi98tgz/posc3610-lecture-rider2009uaro.pdf?dl=0)
31. [Democracy, Territory, and Negotiated Compromises](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ntnfc66nh9h3r0h/posc3610-lecture-millergibler2011dtnc.pdf?dl=0)
32. [Midterm 2 Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/3gaqhc2nlwz3yu9/posc3610-midterm2-review.pdf?dl=0)
33. [Rationalist Explanations for War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/gwyj8f0zg7ijng0/posc3610-lecture-fearon1995rew.pdf?dl=0)
34. [Bargaining and War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ck4jnga76pyazr4/posc3610-lecture-wagner2000bw.pdf?dl=0)
35. [The Capitalist Peace](https://www.dropbox.com/s/68diojd3e2obwpr/posc3610-lecture-gartzke2007cp.pdf?dl=0)
36. [Re-evaluating the Capitalist Peace](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fs09infv3rgv033/posc3610-lecture-reevaluating-cp.pdf?dl=0)
37. [Selection Effects and Deterrence](https://www.dropbox.com/s/31jdg2cjj3iakb2/posc3610-lecture-fearon2002sed.pdf?dl=0)
38. [Final Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2p7xsqggyro8alr/posc3610-final-review.pdf?dl=0)

-->

Commit message:

add new article summary example

teaching/posc-3610.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "POSC 3610 – International Politics in Crisis"
permalink: /teaching/posc-3610-international-politics-in-crisis/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/1965-dacca-women-target-practice.jpg" caption="Women, some of whom are quite young in this photo, take target practice in Dacca (East Pakistan, now Bangladesh) during the 1964-65 Indo-Pakistani War." width=850 align="center" %}

The onset, expansion and consequences of inter-state conflict lie at the heart of international relations scholarship.  This class will explore these topics, highlighting what we know and what we do not know. We will start by clarifying our concepts and what we mean when we use terms like "dispute" and "war." The rest proceeds as an overview of the literature in the spirit of the Correlates of War project. We will discuss the ubiquitous and problematic issue of "power" in international relations. We will reiterate that most conflicts are between land-contiguous neighbors and concern territorial issues between them. Thereafter, we will discuss numerous other correlates of war and peace, like alliances, joint democracy, and rivalry. We will also talk about conflict processes like deterrence, compellence, dispute escalation and the dynamics of war. Students that complete this class should have a broad overview of prominent quantitative scholarship on the cause of disputes and war in the international system, situating them in scholarship in the "peace science" field.


## Course Materials

1. [Syllabus](https://www.dropbox.com/s/issmjjkzl8cjtt5/posc3610-fall2017-syllabus.pdf?dl=0)
2. [Set Up Google Scholar to Find Class Readings on Your Syllabus](http://svmiller.com/blog/2017/07/set-up-google-scholar-to-find-class-readings/)
3. [Dos and Dont's of Writing for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
4. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
5. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
6. [Article Summary Rubric](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9j66ns1g2briyv9/posc3610-article-summary-rubric.pdf?dl=0)
7. [Fun with Attendance and Grades (i.e. Students Should Attend Class)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/fun-with-attendance-grades/)
8. [The Educational Power of Discomfort](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/educational-power-discomfort/)
9. [Everybody Writes: A Web Content Approach for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/everybody-writes-academic/)
10. [Put Your Laptops Away, Kids (Vol. 2)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/put-your-laptops-away-2/)
11. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
12. [Ward and Gleditsch (1998)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2zs0m2upcvuq3vf/svm-notes-wardgleditsch1998dp.pdf?dl=0) [article summary example]
13. [Rousseau et al. (1996)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zl9lopus7pk2anq/svm-notes-rousseauetal1996adn.pdf?dl=0) [article summary]
14. [Welcome](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bzgymb6f8qryykw/posc3610-lecture-welcome.pdf?dl=0)
15. [The Scientific Study of War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/12miyyhlsmgxyuw/posc3610-lecture-scientific-study-war.pdf?dl=0)
16. [Defining Conflicts and Disputes](https://www.dropbox.com/s/vkhb32fk40aa559/posc3610-lecture-defining-conflict-disputes.pdf?dl=0)
17. [States, War, and Conflict Patterns](https://www.dropbox.com/s/6qfz38myn4zprva/posc3610-lecture-states-war-mid-patterns.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Thinking Rationally and Strategically](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ye1pqtk2ux12guh/posc3610-lecture-rationality-1.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Identifying Opportunity for Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/3zaax7g1z9le5la/posc3610-lecture-opportunity-conflict.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Territorial Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/x7ge8udoabr5gcw/posc3610-lecture-territorial-conflict.pdf?dl=0)

<!-- 
3. [Dos and Dont's of Writing for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
4. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
5. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
6. [Article Summary Rubric](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9j66ns1g2briyv9/posc3610-article-summary-rubric.pdf?dl=0)
7. [Fun with Attendance and Grades (i.e. Students Should Attend Class)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/fun-with-attendance-grades/)
8. [The Educational Power of Discomfort](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/educational-power-discomfort/)
9. [Everybody Writes: A Web Content Approach for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/everybody-writes-academic/)
10. [Put Your Laptops Away, Kids (Vol. 2)](http://svmiller.com/blog/2016/05/put-your-laptops-away-2/)
11. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](http://svmiller.com/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
12. [Ward and Gleditsch (1998)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2zs0m2upcvuq3vf/svm-notes-wardgleditsch1998dp.pdf?dl=0) [article summary example]
13. [Kugler and Lemke (2000)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/n4vsq4cq57f3nc2/kuglerlemke2000ptrp.pdf?dl=0) [reading for Week 3]
14. [Introduction/Welcome](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zceionkujy9yoea/posc3610-lecture-syllabus-day.pdf?dl=0)
15. [Defining Conflicts and Disputes](https://www.dropbox.com/s/vkhb32fk40aa559/posc3610-lecture-defining-conflict-disputes.pdf?dl=0)
16. [Inter-State, Intra-State, and Extra-State Wars: A Comprehensive Look at Their Distribution over Time, 1816 - 1997](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s6mhw9cqai0uf1c/posc3610-lecture-sarkeesetal2003isis.pdf?dl=0)
17. [The Origins of War in Neorealist Theory](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhxaif1mvmjyyrv/posc3610-lecture-waltz1988ownt.pdf?dl=0)
18. [The Power Transition Research Program: Assessing Theoretical and Empirical Advances](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/s/wxyxg0giakuwowv/posc3610-lecture-kuglerlemke2000ptrp.html?dl=0)
19. [Alliance Formation and the Balance of Power](https://www.dropbox.com/s/dol1kqh1fnqqm67/posc3610-lecture-walt1985afb.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Alliance Formation and War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/98obh1edmyluihm/posc3610-lecture-smith1995afw.pdf?dl=0)
21. [Arms Races and War: A Debate](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zstnd0dgx0mcxd2/posc3610-lecture-arms-races-debate.pdf?dl=0)
22. [Arms Races and Dispute Escalation: Resolving the Debate](https://www.dropbox.com/s/topalyz7m1oc29n/posc3610-lecture-sample1997arde.pdf?dl=0)
23. [Midterm 1 Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s1brij7soplzyqo/posc3610-midterm1-review.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Normative and Structural Causes of Democratic Peace, 1946-1986](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0dq30vqvqswa098/posc3610-lecture-maozrussett1993nsc.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Assessing the Dyadic Nature of the Democratic Peace, 1918-88](https://www.dropbox.com/s/b3xye1ebhtfoiiw/posc3610-lecture-rousseauetal1996adn.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Democracy and the Peaceful Settlement of International Conflict](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1k8b5za8a8j83rv/posc3610-lecture-dixon1994dps.pdf?dl=0)
27. [Democracy, War Initiation, and Victory](https://www.dropbox.com/s/quoy3ft74ihobvb/posc3610-lecture-reiterstam1998dwiv.pdf?dl=0)
28. [Why Do Neighbors Fight? Proximity, Interaction or Territoriality](https://www.dropbox.com/s/tb88tc4yuz8d1i4/posc3610-lecture-vasquez1995wdn.pdf?dl=0)
29. [A Unified Explanation of Territorial Conflict: Testing the Impact of Sampling Bias, 1919-1992](https://www.dropbox.com/s/gk4znc7jvg8tjfd/posc3610-lecture-senesevasquez2003uetc.pdf?dl=0)
30. [Understanding Arms Race Onset: Rivalry, Threat, and Territorial Competition](https://www.dropbox.com/s/e8nx75q4bi98tgz/posc3610-lecture-rider2009uaro.pdf?dl=0)
31. [Democracy, Territory, and Negotiated Compromises](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ntnfc66nh9h3r0h/posc3610-lecture-millergibler2011dtnc.pdf?dl=0)
32. [Midterm 2 Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/3gaqhc2nlwz3yu9/posc3610-midterm2-review.pdf?dl=0)
33. [Rationalist Explanations for War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/gwyj8f0zg7ijng0/posc3610-lecture-fearon1995rew.pdf?dl=0)
34. [Bargaining and War](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ck4jnga76pyazr4/posc3610-lecture-wagner2000bw.pdf?dl=0)
35. [The Capitalist Peace](https://www.dropbox.com/s/68diojd3e2obwpr/posc3610-lecture-gartzke2007cp.pdf?dl=0)
36. [Re-evaluating the Capitalist Peace](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fs09infv3rgv033/posc3610-lecture-reevaluating-cp.pdf?dl=0)
37. [Selection Effects and Deterrence](https://www.dropbox.com/s/31jdg2cjj3iakb2/posc3610-lecture-fearon2002sed.pdf?dl=0)
38. [Final Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/2p7xsqggyro8alr/posc3610-final-review.pdf?dl=0)

-->
