teaching/posc-3410.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: POSC 3410 – Quantitative Methods in Political Science
permalink: /teaching/posc-3410-quantitative-methods-in-political-science/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/normal-distribution.png" caption="Just some normal distribution." width=676 align="center" %}

Both students and scholars alike are in political science as a result of their keen interest in politics. However, there is an increasing gap between how political science is applied by scholars and how it is understood by students. This class will aim to bridge that gap by introducing students to the science of political science. We will start with the basics, discussing concepts and variables before advancing toward regression. The course will conclude with very basic introductions to some advanced topics like non-normal responses, Bayesian inference and game theory. The overall goal of this class is to prepare students for upper division courses where peer-reviewed journal articles with multiple regressions and/or formal models are prominent.

## Course Materials

1. [Syllabus](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ktbxnyagjhtelhg/posc3410-spring2016-syllabus.pdf?dl=0)
2. [A Beginner's Guide to Using R](/blog/2014/08/a-beginners-guide-to-using-r/)
3. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
4. [Taking Good Notes](/blog/2014/09/taking-good-notes/)
5. [How to Do a Literature Review](/blog/2014/11/how-to-do-a-literature-review/)
6. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
7. [Dos and Don'ts of Writing for Students](/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
8. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
9. [Prospectus Guide](https://www.dropbox.com/s/i2vzzg0vmy6ppw4/posc3410-prospectus-guide.pdf)
10. [Prospectus Example](https://www.dropbox.com/s/swrs77jawpxpec8/posc3410-prospectus-example.pdf?dl=0)
11. [Research Design Paper Instructions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/qhv4d4pjsk2rxgt/posc3410-research-design-paper-instructions.pdf?dl=0)
12. [Problem Set #1](https://www.dropbox.com/s/e8fet2519zuupcm/posc3410-hw1.pdf)
13. [Problem Set #2](https://www.dropbox.com/s/rhvcn7w21xs2b7f/posc3410-hw2.pdf)
14. [Problem Set #3](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bvu3wu457ueuyqx/posc3410-hw3.pdf)
15. [Statistics and Personal Experience](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bqwj62j8bw8rix3/posc3410-lecture-statistics-personal-experience.pdf?dl=0)
16. [The Research Process](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l2wz25xp460z0jw/posc3410-lecture-research-process.pdf?dl=0)
17. [Defining Concepts](https://www.dropbox.com/s/16nm3qevj61muo7/posc3410-lecture-defining-concepts.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Reliability and Validity](https://www.dropbox.com/s/er31mdox83m0zcm/posc3410-lecture-reliable-validity.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Defining and Measuring Variables](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhytxm337ghnxv2/posc3410-lecture-defining-measuring-variables.pdf?dl=0) 
20. [Central Tendency and Dispersion](https://www.dropbox.com/s/03f3mdeiv5mnscf/posc3410-lecture-central-tendency-dispersion.pdf?dl=0)
21. [Framing Hypotheses](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7dh17oyg1890yg8/posc3410-lecture-framing-hypotheses.pdf?dl=0) 
22. [Making Comparisons](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0fsyb4w7qywlj83/posc3410-lecture-making-comparisons.pdf?dl=0)
23. [Midterm Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1emvye9lce3809d/posc3410-lecture-midterm-review.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Probability and Counting for Political Science](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7ndq1w8nijfth3b/posc3410-lecture-probability-1.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Probability Distributions and Functions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ptkvzuutb7qu73z/posc3410-lecture-probability-2.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Controlled Comparisons and Controlled Relationships](https://www.dropbox.com/s/waxt62vsyp38tn8/posc3410-lecture-controlled-comparison-1.pdf?dl=0) 
27. [Random Sampling and Variation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/w4r7j3tpgkm440h/posc3410-lecture-random-sampling-variation.pdf?dl=0)
28. [Central Limit Theorem, Normal Distributions, and Inference](https://www.dropbox.com/s/xik3n8cs9xe9i5q/posc3410-lecture-clt-nd-inference.pdf?dl=0)               

<!-- 14. [Introduction](https://www.dropbox.com/s/jvfycushxgewhg6/posc3410-lecture-intro.pdf?dl=0)
15. [Statistics and Personal Experience](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bqwj62j8bw8rix3/posc3410-lecture-statistics-personal-experience.pdf?dl=0)
16. [The Research Process](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l2wz25xp460z0jw/posc3410-lecture-research-process.pdf?dl=0)
17. [Defining Concepts](https://www.dropbox.com/s/16nm3qevj61muo7/posc3410-lecture-defining-concepts.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Reliability and Validity](https://www.dropbox.com/s/er31mdox83m0zcm/posc3410-lecture-reliable-validity.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Defining and Measuring Variables](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhytxm337ghnxv2/posc3410-lecture-defining-measuring-variables.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Central Tendency and Dispersion](https://www.dropbox.com/s/03f3mdeiv5mnscf/posc3410-lecture-central-tendency-dispersion.pdf?dl=0)
21. [Framing Hypotheses](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7dh17oyg1890yg8/posc3410-lecture-framing-hypotheses.pdf?dl=0)
22. [Making Comparisons](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0fsyb4w7qywlj83/posc3410-lecture-making-comparisons.pdf?dl=0)
23. [Midterm Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1emvye9lce3809d/posc3410-lecture-midterm-review.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Probability and Counting for Political Science](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7ndq1w8nijfth3b/posc3410-lecture-probability-1.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Probability Distributions and Functions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ptkvzuutb7qu73z/posc3410-lecture-probability-2.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Random Sampling and Variation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/w4r7j3tpgkm440h/posc3410-lecture-random-sampling-variation.pdf?dl=0)
27. [Central Limit Theorem, Normal Distribution, and Inference](https://www.dropbox.com/s/xik3n8cs9xe9i5q/posc3410-lecture-clt-nd-inference.pdf?dl=0)
28. [Correlation and Linear Regression](https://www.dropbox.com/s/z7cbv9oqtvoguq8/posc3410-lecture-correlation-linear-regression.pdf?dl=0)
29. [Extending OLS: Fixed Effects and Controls](https://www.dropbox.com/s/01cqkqxzulwcp9s/posc3410-lecture-ols-fixed-effects-controls.pdf?dl=0)
30. [Logistic Regression](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zt99vce284gspux/posc3410-lecture-logistic-regression.pdf?dl=0)
31. [Bayesian Inference for Comparative Research](https://www.dropbox.com/s/kep6bxa3cvu7392/posc3410-lecture-westernjackman1994bicr.pdf?dl=0)
32. [Scaling by Two Standard Deviations](https://www.dropbox.com/s/t3mkketzgcfvzsn/posc3410-lecture-scaling-two-sds.pdf?dl=0)
33. [Post-estimation Simulation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s1t8chisw756zwz/posc3410-lecture-post-estimation-simulation.pdf?dl=0)
34. [Growth in a Time of Debt (or a Workflow Gone Bad)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9x2kxn9zt90i1ly/posc3410-lecture-reinhart-rogoff.pdf?dl=0)
35. [Final Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ta8mzlbm6jvdgto/posc3410-lecture-final-review.pdf?dl=0) -->

Commit message:

add link on p-values to posc-3410.md

teaching/posc-3410.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: POSC 3410 – Quantitative Methods in Political Science
permalink: /teaching/posc-3410-quantitative-methods-in-political-science/
---

{% include image.html url="/images/normal-distribution.png" caption="Just some normal distribution." width=676 align="center" %}

Both students and scholars alike are in political science as a result of their keen interest in politics. However, there is an increasing gap between how political science is applied by scholars and how it is understood by students. This class will aim to bridge that gap by introducing students to the science of political science. We will start with the basics, discussing concepts and variables before advancing toward regression. The course will conclude with very basic introductions to some advanced topics like non-normal responses, Bayesian inference and game theory. The overall goal of this class is to prepare students for upper division courses where peer-reviewed journal articles with multiple regressions and/or formal models are prominent.

## Course Materials

1. [Syllabus](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ktbxnyagjhtelhg/posc3410-spring2016-syllabus.pdf?dl=0)
2. [A Beginner's Guide to Using R](/blog/2014/08/a-beginners-guide-to-using-r/)
3. [Reading a Regression Table: A Guide for Students](/blog/2014/08/reading-a-regression-table-a-guide-for-students/)
4. [The American Statistical Association's Statement on *p*-values: Context, Process, and Purpose](https://www.dropbox.com/s/x6wlbuov1da8a1b/The%20ASA%20s%20statement%20on%20p%20values%20context%20process%20and%20purpose.pdf?dl=0)
5. [Taking Good Notes](/blog/2014/09/taking-good-notes/)
6. [How to Do a Literature Review](/blog/2014/11/how-to-do-a-literature-review/)
7. [Assorted Tips for Students on Writing Research Papers](http://svmiller.com/blog/2015/12/assorted-tips-students-research-papers/)
8. [Dos and Don'ts of Writing for Students](/blog/2015/06/dos-and-donts-of-writing-for-students/)
9. [Exam Grading Policy](https://www.dropbox.com/s/apihjs7di81aqcv/svm-exam-grading-policy.pdf?dl=0)
10. [Prospectus Guide](https://www.dropbox.com/s/i2vzzg0vmy6ppw4/posc3410-prospectus-guide.pdf)
11. [Prospectus Example](https://www.dropbox.com/s/swrs77jawpxpec8/posc3410-prospectus-example.pdf?dl=0)
12. [Research Design Paper Instructions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/qhv4d4pjsk2rxgt/posc3410-research-design-paper-instructions.pdf?dl=0)
13. [Problem Set #1](https://www.dropbox.com/s/e8fet2519zuupcm/posc3410-hw1.pdf)
14. [Problem Set #2](https://www.dropbox.com/s/rhvcn7w21xs2b7f/posc3410-hw2.pdf)
15. [Problem Set #3](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bvu3wu457ueuyqx/posc3410-hw3.pdf)
16. [Statistics and Personal Experience](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bqwj62j8bw8rix3/posc3410-lecture-statistics-personal-experience.pdf?dl=0)
17. [The Research Process](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l2wz25xp460z0jw/posc3410-lecture-research-process.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Defining Concepts](https://www.dropbox.com/s/16nm3qevj61muo7/posc3410-lecture-defining-concepts.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Reliability and Validity](https://www.dropbox.com/s/er31mdox83m0zcm/posc3410-lecture-reliable-validity.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Defining and Measuring Variables](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhytxm337ghnxv2/posc3410-lecture-defining-measuring-variables.pdf?dl=0) 
21. [Central Tendency and Dispersion](https://www.dropbox.com/s/03f3mdeiv5mnscf/posc3410-lecture-central-tendency-dispersion.pdf?dl=0)
22. [Framing Hypotheses](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7dh17oyg1890yg8/posc3410-lecture-framing-hypotheses.pdf?dl=0) 
23. [Making Comparisons](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0fsyb4w7qywlj83/posc3410-lecture-making-comparisons.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Midterm Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1emvye9lce3809d/posc3410-lecture-midterm-review.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Probability and Counting for Political Science](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7ndq1w8nijfth3b/posc3410-lecture-probability-1.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Probability Distributions and Functions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ptkvzuutb7qu73z/posc3410-lecture-probability-2.pdf?dl=0)
27. [Controlled Comparisons and Controlled Relationships](https://www.dropbox.com/s/waxt62vsyp38tn8/posc3410-lecture-controlled-comparison-1.pdf?dl=0) 
28. [Random Sampling and Variation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/w4r7j3tpgkm440h/posc3410-lecture-random-sampling-variation.pdf?dl=0)
29. [Central Limit Theorem, Normal Distributions, and Inference](https://www.dropbox.com/s/xik3n8cs9xe9i5q/posc3410-lecture-clt-nd-inference.pdf?dl=0)

<!-- 14. [Introduction](https://www.dropbox.com/s/jvfycushxgewhg6/posc3410-lecture-intro.pdf?dl=0)
15. [Statistics and Personal Experience](https://www.dropbox.com/s/bqwj62j8bw8rix3/posc3410-lecture-statistics-personal-experience.pdf?dl=0)
16. [The Research Process](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l2wz25xp460z0jw/posc3410-lecture-research-process.pdf?dl=0)
17. [Defining Concepts](https://www.dropbox.com/s/16nm3qevj61muo7/posc3410-lecture-defining-concepts.pdf?dl=0)
18. [Reliability and Validity](https://www.dropbox.com/s/er31mdox83m0zcm/posc3410-lecture-reliable-validity.pdf?dl=0)
19. [Defining and Measuring Variables](https://www.dropbox.com/s/fhytxm337ghnxv2/posc3410-lecture-defining-measuring-variables.pdf?dl=0)
20. [Central Tendency and Dispersion](https://www.dropbox.com/s/03f3mdeiv5mnscf/posc3410-lecture-central-tendency-dispersion.pdf?dl=0)
21. [Framing Hypotheses](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7dh17oyg1890yg8/posc3410-lecture-framing-hypotheses.pdf?dl=0)
22. [Making Comparisons](https://www.dropbox.com/s/0fsyb4w7qywlj83/posc3410-lecture-making-comparisons.pdf?dl=0)
23. [Midterm Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/1emvye9lce3809d/posc3410-lecture-midterm-review.pdf?dl=0)
24. [Probability and Counting for Political Science](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7ndq1w8nijfth3b/posc3410-lecture-probability-1.pdf?dl=0)
25. [Probability Distributions and Functions](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ptkvzuutb7qu73z/posc3410-lecture-probability-2.pdf?dl=0)
26. [Random Sampling and Variation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/w4r7j3tpgkm440h/posc3410-lecture-random-sampling-variation.pdf?dl=0)
27. [Central Limit Theorem, Normal Distribution, and Inference](https://www.dropbox.com/s/xik3n8cs9xe9i5q/posc3410-lecture-clt-nd-inference.pdf?dl=0)
28. [Correlation and Linear Regression](https://www.dropbox.com/s/z7cbv9oqtvoguq8/posc3410-lecture-correlation-linear-regression.pdf?dl=0)
29. [Extending OLS: Fixed Effects and Controls](https://www.dropbox.com/s/01cqkqxzulwcp9s/posc3410-lecture-ols-fixed-effects-controls.pdf?dl=0)
30. [Logistic Regression](https://www.dropbox.com/s/zt99vce284gspux/posc3410-lecture-logistic-regression.pdf?dl=0)
31. [Bayesian Inference for Comparative Research](https://www.dropbox.com/s/kep6bxa3cvu7392/posc3410-lecture-westernjackman1994bicr.pdf?dl=0)
32. [Scaling by Two Standard Deviations](https://www.dropbox.com/s/t3mkketzgcfvzsn/posc3410-lecture-scaling-two-sds.pdf?dl=0)
33. [Post-estimation Simulation](https://www.dropbox.com/s/s1t8chisw756zwz/posc3410-lecture-post-estimation-simulation.pdf?dl=0)
34. [Growth in a Time of Debt (or a Workflow Gone Bad)](https://www.dropbox.com/s/9x2kxn9zt90i1ly/posc3410-lecture-reinhart-rogoff.pdf?dl=0)
35. [Final Review](https://www.dropbox.com/s/ta8mzlbm6jvdgto/posc3410-lecture-final-review.pdf?dl=0) -->
